Draft release policy (#2248)
tarantool/doc: doc/release/new-policy.rst

Release Policy Project
======================

Summary
-------

> Tarantool release policy changes to become more clear and intuitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Tarantool release policy has changed to become more clear and intuitive.
```
This is clearer. The current version is harder to read ("is 'changes' a verb or a noun? hm")

The new policy uses a `SemVer-like <https://semver.org/>`__ versioning format,
and introduces a new version lifecycle with more long-time support series.
This document explains the new release policy, versioning rules, and release series lifecycle.

The new release policy replaces :doc:`the legacy policy <release/policy>`
for the versions in 2.x.y series since 2.TBD.0,
and for the future major series ones (3.0.0+) as well.

The topics below describe the new versioning policy in more detail.

Versioning
----------

Production-ready (release) version labels consist of major, minor and patch numbers:

..  code-block:: text

    MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH

Versions in development and release candidates use the same pattern with an additional suffix:

..  code-block:: text

    MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH-<pre-release suffix>

There are four stages of development before a release:

#.  Alpha (``MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH-alphaN``)
#.  Beta (``MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH-betaN``)
#.  Release candidate (``MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH-rcN``)

> #.  Nightly build (``MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH-dev``)

Reviewer 2: We call 'Early development', 'Support' and 'End of life' as stages, so, maybe, it would be better to call pre-release / build types using another word.

A release series goes through a set of alpha, beta and release candidate versions,

> and eventually gets released.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A release series is a succession of alpha, beta, and release candidate versions,
which is eventually concluded by the release version.
```
Currently it reads as though the "series" - the multitude of versions - eventually gets released, while we are speaking about a single version (the final release) only.

For example:

..  code-block:: text

    3.2.0-alpha1
    3.2.0-alpha2
    ...
    3.2.0-alpha7
    3.2.0-beta1
    ...
    3.2.0-beta5
    3.2.0-rc1
    ...
    3.2.0-rc4

>     3.2.0 (release)

Reviewer 2: We can continue this list a bit with rc / release to hook all possible situations.

Backwards compatibility is guaranteed between minor versions in the same major release series.
Also, it is appreciated but not guaranteed between different major numbers.
A detailed description of compatibility guarantees will be published later.

Changes
-------

There are several significant changes from the legacy release policy:

*   The third number in the version name doesn't distinguish between
    alpha, beta and release version anymore.

*   In the legacy release policy, 1.10 was a long-term support (LTS) series,
    while 2.x.y had "stable releases", but wasn't an LTS series.

    Now both series are long-term supported.

>     The intended support time is at least two years.

Reviewer 2: I would highlight: since a first release.

> A release series lifecycle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The release series lifecycle
```

--------------------------

> A release series goes over the following stages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every release series goes through the following stages:
```

..  container:: table

    ..  rst-class:: left-align-column-1
    ..  rst-class:: left-align-column-2

    ..  list-table::

        *   -   **Stage**
            -   **Versions to publish**
            -   **Example**

        *   -   Early development
            -   Alpha, beta, release candidate
            -   3

        *   -   Support
            -   Release candidate, release

        *   -   End of life

>             -   N/A

Reviewer 2: This table is not rendered on the web page.

The sections below describe those stages in detail.

> A release series stages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The stages of a release series
```

-----------------------

Early development
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The stage goes on until a first release. Alpha, beta versions and pre-releases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The stage goes on until the first release. Alpha, beta versions and pre-releases
```

> are published within this stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are published at this stage.
```

In fact, this stage splits into two phases: development of a new functionality
and its stabilization.

A premature functionality might be removed on the alpha/beta stage, but it will

> not be removed after the publication of a release candidate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In fact, this stage splits into two phases: development of new functionality
and its stabilization.

Premature functionality might be removed on the alpha/beta stage, but it will
not be removed after the release candidate is issued.
```

Support
~~~~~~~

> The stage starts when a first release is published. The release series now is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The stage starts when the first release is published. The release series now is
```

an object of only backward compatible changes.

> At this stage, we're fixing all known security problems and fixing all found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this stage, we're fixing all known security problems and all found
```
"fixing" is repeated

degradations since the previous series.

> A series receives degradation fixes and other bugfixes till the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The series receives degradation fixes and other bugfixes till its
```
as in "the series in question", "the series we are talking about"

end of life.

The decision of whether to fix a particular problem in a particular release series

> is based on the impact of the problem, risks around backward compatibility and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is based on the impact of the problem, risks around backward compatibility, and the
```
@NickVolynkin recommended using the Oxford comma

complexity of backporting a fix.

A release series might receive new features at this stage, but only in a
backward compatible manner. A release candidate might be published for a new

> functionality before a release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The release series might receive new features at this stage, but only in a
backward compatible manner. A release candidate might be published for new
functionality before the release version.
```
as in " the release series in question"
does "for" mean "because of"?

Reviewer 2: A new functionality is always introduced before a release with this functionality.

The idea of this sentence is the following: when we want to collect a preliminary feedback for a new functionality during the support stage, we can publish a release candidate, ask some customers to verify it on their staging servers and, when we'll found that everything is fine, finally publish a release with the new functionality. So, the support stage may be like `release, release, release`, but also it may be like `release, rc, rc, release, rc, release, release`.

During the support period we're adding new versions of supported Linux distros
to our build infrastructure.

> A support period might be extended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support periods can be extended.
```
"Might is used to express what is hypothetical, counterfactual, or remotely possible." https://writingexplained.org/may-vs-might-difference

See the **Delivery channels** section for information about a particular bug in the release

> or about the resolve of a feature request.

Reviewer 2: There is no such section here.

End of life
~~~~~~~~~~~

A series reaches the end of life (EOL) when the last release in the series is
published. The series will not receive updates anymore.

> In modules, connectors and tools, we don't guarantee support of a release series

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In modules, connectors and tools, we don't guarantee support of any release series
```

that reaches EOL.

A release series cannot reach EOL until the vast majority of productions

> (where we have commitments / SLA) will be updated to a newer series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(where we have commitments / SLA) is updated to a newer series.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: What I really like from the 'Version string meaning' section of the [RFC](https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/discussions/6182): paragraphs, which clarify how pre-releases are intended to be used:

> ### Nightly build
>
> Those versions are not supposed to be used by customers. A versions string
contains `-dev` postfix.
>
> ### Alpha
>
> An alpha version is for early adopters and developers of dependent components
(such as connectors and modules).
>
> <...>
>
> ### Beta
>
> A beta version is good to start developing of a new application.
>
> <...>
>
> ### Release candidate
>
> A release candidate fits good to setup a staging server.
>
> <...>
>
> ### Release
>
> A release is the version that is ready for production usage.
>
> <...>

Other details are also interesting, but given paragraphs look as 'must have' for the release policy description.

*   The third number in the version label doesn't distinguish between
    pre-release (alpha and beta) and release versions.
    Instead, it is used for patch (bugfix-only) releases.
    Pre-release versions have suffixes, like ``3.0.0-alpha1``.

*   In the legacy release policy, ``1.10`` was a long-term support (LTS) series,
    while ``2.x.y`` had stable releases, but wasn't an LTS series.
    Now both series are long-term supported.

The topics below describe the new versioning policy in more detail.

Versioning policy
-----------------

Release series and versions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The new Tarantool release policy is based on having several release series,
each with its own lifecycle, pre-release and release versions.

..  glossary::

    Release series

        Release series is a sequence of development and production-ready versions
        with linear evolution toward a defined roadmap.
        A series has a distinct lifecycle and certain compatibility guarantees within itself and with other series.
        The intended support time for each series is at least two years since the first release.

>         At the moment when this document is published, there are two release series: ``1.10`` and ``2.x.y``.

Reviewer 2: I think that more correct wording would be 'series 1.10 and series 2'.

        ..  code-block:: text

            MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH

            3.0.1
            3.0.2

Release versions conform to a set of requirements:

    *   The release has gone through pre-release testing and adoption
        in the internal projects until there were no doubts regarding its stability.

    *   There are no known bugs in the typical usage scenarios.

    *   There are no degradations from the previous release or release series, in case of a major release.

Backwards compatibility is guaranteed between all versions in the same release series.
It is also appreciated, but not guaranteed between different release series (major number changes).
A detailed description of compatibility guarantees will be published later.

Pre-release versions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

..  glossary::

    Pre-release version

        Pre-release versions are the ones published for testing and evaluation,
        and not intended for production use.
        Such versions use the same pattern with an additional suffix:

        ..  code-block:: text

            MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH-suffix

There are a few types of pre-release versions:

..  glossary::

>     Nightly build

Reviewer 2: Maybe call it 'development build'? I doubt we'll publish nightly / per push builds for them.

        Nightly builds reflect the state of current development process.
        They're used entirely for development and testing,
        and not intended for any external use.

>         Nightly builds have suffixes made with ``git describe --always --long-dev``:

Reviewer 2: It should be `$(git describe --always --long)-dev` or `` `git describe --always --long`-dev `` assuming `2.10.2-149-g1575f3c07-dev` and so on. We can eliminate the git describe command and just give the example, because it is the user documentation.

complexity of backporting a fix.

A release series might receive new features at this stage,
but only in a backward compatible manner.
A release candidate might be published for a new functionality before a release.

During the support period a release series receives new versions of supported Linux
distributives to build infrastructure.

The intended duration of the support period for each series is at least two years.

End of life
~~~~~~~~~~~

A series reaches the end of life (EOL) when the last release in the series is
published. The series will not receive updates anymore.

In modules, connectors and tools, we don't guarantee support of a release series
that reaches EOL.

A release series cannot reach EOL until the vast majority of production environments,
for which we have commitments and SLAs, will be updated to a newer series.

Versions per lifecycle stage
----------------------------

..  container:: table

    ..  rst-class:: left-align-column-1
    ..  rst-class:: left-align-column-2

    ..  list-table::
        :header-rows: 1

        *   -   Stage
            -   Version types
            -   Examples

        *   -   Early development

>             -   Alpha, beta, release candidate, nightly builds (not published)

Reviewer 2: I doubt we should menting development builds in this table. It is not something published for a user. Similarly, we don't mention a custon builds from developer branches here.

Release Policy Project
======================

Summary
-------

The Tarantool release policy is changing to become more clear and intuitive.
The new policy uses a `SemVer-like <https://semver.org/>`__ versioning format,
and introduces a new version lifecycle with more long-time support series.
This document explains the new release policy, versioning rules, and :term:`release series` lifecycle.

> The new release policy replaces :doc:`the legacy policy <release/policy>`

Author: ```suggestion
The new release policy replaces :doc:`the legacy policy </release/policy>`
```

        and doesn't have known bugs in typical usage scenarios
        or degradations from the previous release series.

        Release candidate is a good choice to set up a staging server.

        ..  code-block:: text

            MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH-rcN

            3.0.0-rc1
            3.0.0-rc2
            3.0.1-rc1

Release series lifecycle
--------------------------

Every release series goes through the following stages:

..  contents::
    :local:

Early development
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The early development stage goes on until the first :term:`major release <major release>`.
Alpha, beta, and release candidate versions are published at this stage.

The stage splits into two phases:

1.  Development of a new functionality through alpha and beta versions.
    Features can be added and, sometimes, removed in this phase.

2.  Stabilization starts with the first release candidate version.
    Feature set doesn't change in this phase.

Support
~~~~~~~

The stage starts when the first release is published.
The release series now is an object of only backward compatible changes.

At this stage, all known security problems and all found

> degradations since the previous series are fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
degradations since the previous series are being fixed.
```
If I understand the process correctly, "are fixed" might be confusing, as it sounds like everything has already been fixed

Support
~~~~~~~

The stage starts when the first release is published.
The release series now is an object of only backward compatible changes.

At this stage, all known security problems and all found
degradations since the previous series are fixed.

The series receives degradation fixes and other bugfixes during the support stage
and until the series transitions into the end of life (EOL) stage.

The decision of whether to fix a particular problem in a particular release series
depends on the impact of the problem, risks around backward compatibility, and the
complexity of backporting a fix.

The release series might receive new features at this stage,
but only in a backward compatible manner.

> A release candidate might be published if new functionality is introduced before the release version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   To collect feedback for new functionality, we may also publish a release candidate before the final release version.
```

Reviewer 2: I would say 'next' instead of 'final'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   We may also publish a release candidate to collect feedback before the release version.
```
I looked at the context more closely and this looks like a better fit. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Looks ok.
